---
title: "Performance-Related Biases and Perceptions"ccc
bibliography: ref.bib
date: "2023-07-11"
output:
  md_document: # Add md_document as the output format
    variant: gfm # Use GitHub Flavored Markdown (optional, but recommended)
    preserve_yaml: true # Preserve the YAML header in the output

---

## Sections

1)  The End Bias Lenz (2012) Yearly and Cumulative RDI Growth (\$,%)
    Rates
2)  Citizens’ Perceptions of Financial Performance Kang, Chen, and
    Luna-Reyes (2022) Transparency and State-Level
3)  Facial Bias Ahler et al. (2017) Trait Identification,
    Future-Performance

## Abstract

The evaluation of incumbent economic performance plays a crucial role in
democratic accountability. However, the tendency for voters to simplify
retrospective assessments by substituting conditions at the end for the
whole, known as the end bias, can distort their judgments. This study
investigates the impact of framing economic information with yearly and
cumulative levels on mitigating the end bias and enabling more informed
assessments of the incumbent’s economic performance. We draw on a series
of surveys and experiments that demonstrate how voters unintentionally
rely on election-year performance due to the accessibility of this
information, despite their actual intention to judge presidents based on
cumulative growth. The findings suggest that providing voters with both
yearly and cumulative economic framing can align their actions with
their intentions, eliminating the election-year emphasis. Furthermore,
we explore the influence of pre-existing affective judgments on
overcoming the end bias, particularly in the evaluation of identified
incumbents. By examining the interplay between framing, affective
judgments, and the end-heuristic, this study aims to shed light on
improving the accuracy and effectiveness of retrospective economic
voting.

\[Provide a brief abstract or summary of your dissertation.\]

## Introduction

Introduction: Evaluating Incumbent Economic Performance: The Impact of
Cumulative Framing and Identification

Retrospective decision-making in assessing the performance of incumbent
politicians is susceptible to various biases that limit voters’ ability
to make accurate judgments (Huber, Hill, & Lenz, \[year\]). Previous
observational studies have highlighted these biases, but their findings
have been subject to alternative interpretations due to the complexities
of the real world. To further understand these biases, we conducted a
series of experiments in a simplified setting to examine voters’
limitations in using retrospective decision rules.

In our experiments, we observed that participants exhibited biases in
their retrospective evaluations, even when informed and incentivized to
weigh all performance equally. Specifically, participants tended to
overweight recent relative to overall incumbent performance when the
election event was closer in time (Huber, Hill, & Lenz, \[year\]). They
were also influenced by unrelated events, such as a lottery affecting
their welfare, and rhetoric, which led them to give more weight to
recent incumbent performance (Huber, Hill, & Lenz, \[year\]). These
biases persisted despite our efforts to ensure participants’ awareness
of the importance of considering all performance equally.

These findings indicate significant limitations in voters’ ability to
use retrospective decision rules effectively and objectively. Even in
controlled experimental settings, biases emerge, suggesting that similar
biases may exist in real-world voting scenarios. Moreover, the influence
of irrelevant information on voting behavior highlights the complexities
in voters’ retrospective assessments of candidates’ performance (Healy,
Malhotra, & Mo, \[year\]). For instance, studies examining the impact of
local college football games just before an election reveal that
unrelated events can influence voters, potentially affecting the
electoral outcome (Healy, Malhotra, & Mo, \[year\]).

Our research aims to contribute to the understanding of evaluating
incumbent economic performance by exploring the impact of framing
economic information with yearly and cumulative levels. By examining the
interplay between cognitive biases, cumulative framing, and
identification of incumbents, we seek to enhance the accuracy and
fairness of retrospective economic voting. This study has implications
for improving democratic accountability and informing strategies that
align voters’ assessments with their intentions, ultimately facilitating
more informed and equitable decision-making processes.

\[Provide a brief introduction including context about retrospective
voting and the end bias, the importance of economic performance
evaluations for democratic accountability.\]

## Theoretical Background

\[Discuss the theories, models, and concepts related to end bias or end
heuristic, retrospective voting, economic evaluations, and democratic
accountability.\]

## Variables & Hypothesis

- Dependent variable: Economic evaluation of a 4-year tenure
- Independent variables: 4 variables representing each year of the
  tenure
- Conditions: Control (displaying yearly Real Disposable Income Growth
  graph for each year), Cumulative Treatment (displaying yearly and
  cumulative graphs), Control or Cumulative Treatment (with or without
  the name of the president)

\[State the specific hypotheses or research questions you will be
addressing.\]

## Proposed Method & Expected Results

\[Describe the proposed research methodology, such as an online survey
experiment in Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk), and the expected results
based on the hypotheses mentioned earlier.\]

## Conclusion

\[Provide a fill-in-the-blanks conclusion once the actual findings are
obtained.\]

## Implications and future directions

\[Provide a fill-in-the-blanks section for implications and future
directions once the actual findings are obtained.\]

## Appendix

\[Provide a brief description of the contents you plan to include in the
appendix.\]

## References

\[List the references you have cited using the appropriate citation
style.\]

<div id="refs" class="references csl-bib-body hanging-indent">

<div id="ref-ahlerFaceValueExperimental2017" class="csl-entry">

Ahler, Douglas J., Jack Citrin, Michael C. Dougal, and Gabriel S. Lenz.
2017. “Face Value? Experimental Evidence That Candidate Appearance
Influences Electoral Choice.” *Political Behavior* 39 (1): 77–102.
<https://doi.org/10.1007/s11109-016-9348-6>.

</div>

<div id="ref-kangUnderstandingCitizensPerception2022a"
class="csl-entry">

Kang, Hyewon, Gang Chen, and Luis F. Luna-Reyes. 2022. “Understanding
Citizens’ Perception of Government Fiscal Information Through a Survey
Experiment.” *Government Information Quarterly* 39 (1): 101661.
<https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2021.101661>.

</div>

<div id="ref-lenzFollowLeaderHow2012" class="csl-entry">

Lenz, Gabriel S. 2012. *Follow the Leader?: How Voters Respond to
Politicians’ Policies and Performance*. Chicago Studies in American
Politics. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

</div>

</div>
